## Open Source Work Platform
Anna Barrientos (aib3), IS340 SP 2026

### Introduction  
Remote work is highly sought after, especially after learning through COVID that so many jobs can be completed perfectly fine from the comfort of your own home. While COVID has already, for the most part, passed by, it was a formative experience for many to learn how their work habits change from the office to at home. However, issues that end up plaguing many of those who are employed in the remote work world is that of poor communication problems caused by a dependence on different softwares, as well as general stress and discomfort from constantly searching through different tabs. These are issues that I aim to work towards mitigating through a customizable remote work platform, ReSolver, not only just addressing miscommunication and stress, but primarily focusing on the person in front of the screen, giving them a chance to create an environment that works for them. ReSolver is meant to bring comfort through allowing users to create their ideal work environment, making employees not only more efficient through more customized organization, but also happier and more content with their workspace.

This project originated from a class I took in my freshman year, where we were tasked with a semester-long project that culminated in an extensive report including interviews, research, comparisons, and a prototype that was continuously being developed and reiterated on Figma. Open-source was not something that I was well-versed in at the time, meaning that it was never a consideration for improving the user’s experience. However, when this final was introduced, the possibility of incorporating open-source principles and community interaction When making this originally, I had already included some ideas for customization, but nothing too extensive due to the limited amount of time we had to complete it. Now that I’ve gotten the chance to work on it more, I wanted to apply open-source to it to help bring those ideas back and expand on it further. 



### Concept and Purpose
For a more clear explanation about what ReSolver is, it can be summarized as a software designed for companies to adopt and use as their primary work platform for their employees, similar to how Slack or Discord operate for many organizations. The general goal is to centralize all of, or majority, of the work that employees do to one platform for a more streamlined experience in general. This is done with the aim of eliminating cluttered workspaces and increasing organization, aiding with reducing stress and frustration from managing multiple different working parts, especially for those who work only online and have to go through several programs to get simple tasks completed. As such, what will be implemented into ReSolver as the base version with any additional modules downloaded would be basic communication such as messaging, calling, and screenshare features. Additionally, other main features from the original concept meant to assist employees and communication included an employee directory with skills and positions listed, meant to prevent difficulty with finding the right person to contact. Another was a chatbot to help answer questions about policies and guidelines, that also acted to manage conflict by providing advice depending on your own position and details provided by the user. As feedback sessions begin for the open-source version of ReSolver, more features would be defined and implemented in the base version as well. On top of all of this, the main reason for making ReSolver open-source is to make it even more personal for every single employee, not limiting them to just the premade modules included in the base version, but allowing them to create anything they feel would assist them the best throughout their work process. The point is so people can contribute their own modules or widgets to add into ReSolver and make it their own. For the actual process of creating and sharing these modules, it would be done through a process involving GitHub for community collaboration and a community page, similar to those that Figma or Framer use that are already a part of the software, making these modules easy to search for and download, even for those who are not technologically savvy. 

Something to note is that ReSolver’s newer capabilities to be customized and designed for different people and different purposes, also means that it does not necessarily have to be confined to the idea of remote work, and can be used within an in-person workplace as well. While keeping it to remote workers was the original intention of ReSolver, there are unlimited opportunities for the platform to be adapted to any environment. 

### Open-source
Expanding further on the open source aspect, the ReSolver team would provide the source code and make it available to anyone who wants to create their own modules or simply experiment with their workspace. Projects would be available through the community page, and so would a link for the ReSolver GitHub for the code and documentation on how to get started to make sure that everything is easy to find and navigate. As for the community itself and the people who would be contributing, we want to make sure that the modules that are being uploaded are being reviewed by moderators and other members of the community. As such, the code for these modules would go through a version control style of governance. 

### Community Cultivation and Governance
Before delving into governance and how the open-source community would be managed, the community itself needs to be addressed first, both in what traits they would possess and how they would be recruited to participate. The roles of contributors would be to make their own modules, consult and work with other community members, and finalize them to be handed off to moderators and uploaded to the community page. The user profiles for those using ReSolver generally includes companies that have employees that work remotely or online quite often, and early adopters of the platform can be small businesses that are starting out and looking for a work platform for their employees. Therefore, our user channels would be to reach out to as many new businesses and pitch ReSolver to them, as well as simply advertising online to people who are interested in technology, software development, and open-source projects. As for the actual contributors, these would consist of people who are already interested in software development or UI/UX design that work remotely and know what they want to change in typical remote work softwares. In order to find these people, it would consist of a search of software development companies that use a company-wide established work platform and reaching out to individual employees. They would then introduce them to the concept of ReSolver, and start a conversation about whether or not they would be interested in participating, as well as what specific niche they feel they could fill as a contributor.

For governance, it would be done through version control on GitHub, where contributors would make their own branch and code and design the modules that they want to see integrated into ReSolver. From there, they would open a pull request to get feedback from both community moderators that work for ReSolver, as well as other community members. These members can work collaboratively and contribute their own skills to these modules, such as someone wanting to code a module but not being sure about how to style it visually and needing the help of a UI designer. Once reviewed and approved by these parties, it would then be uploaded to the community page by a community moderator to get it done smoothly and properly. From there, it would be available to any user of ReSolver to download. 

General standards would also be put into place to ensure that nothing inappropriate or harmful is being uploaded, even as a pull request, which is part of the main reasoning for version control governance. Outside of preventing inappropriate content from getting to the community page, making sure that the code actually works properly and wouldn’t cause any issues for other users is also a priority when going through the version control process. As another standard practice for ReSolver and the community page, every person who contributes to each module would be credited properly for their work, not only being respectful to the efforts of everyone involved, but also making this a chance to gain exposure for their own skills and work. 

### Automation
Automation certainly has a potential to be implemented into ReSolver, especially when it comes to open-source community management and taking care of mundane tasks that take up unnecessary time. For those working as community moderators in ReSolver, some tasks that would be included in this would be checking for inappropriate content or words, looking for faulty or potentially disruptive code, and answering questions from contributors looking for assistance. In this situation, there is a solid benefit to the inclusion of algorithms that would detect content that goes against the community standards. On top of this, an AI could comb through the code that is uploaded as a pull request to flag anything that may be of concern. As for answering questions, ReSolver previously had a chatbot integrated into the platform for conflict management purposes, however it also assisted with answering questions about policies and documentation, fitting in perfectly for the community page as well. Therefore, newcomers or someone simply needing help would be able to receive immediate responses to their questions with the opportunity to continue asking clarifying questions. This would reduce the workload that moderators have and give them the opportunity to work more closely with contributors. As with any implementation of automation, it is important to acknowledge the possible downsides that come along with it, such as inaccurate or biased judgement, or frustration from users who want to talk to a person and not an AI. If ReSolver were to implement automation, decisions would be made with human review and approval, as well as still keeping them on standby in the event that someone would like their questions answered by a person instead.

### User Experience and User Interface
With ReSolver’s aim being to ensure that users are having the most efficient and pleasing experience possible when using a work platform, that points to user experience being integral to the process of designing the base version of ReSolver. To emphasize this, ReSolver would have a dedicated UI/UX team to conduct interviews and feedback sessions with potential users and contributors who have had to, or currently do, work primarily on work-related software. This team would prompt them to share their experiences in the past, both positive and negative, to pinpoint the most beneficial and most harmful aspects across these platforms. After analyzing these results, the UI/UX team would eventually gather information on what the main, most important features need to be available with ReSolver without downloading any new modules. From there, the team would continue to iterate, design, and conduct feedback sessions with these potential users until the best possible design is reached.

With this continuous reiteration, that also brings in the importance of the user interface field and how it relates to a platform like ReSolver. Since the main reason for making ReSolver open-source is for further customization and allowing users to tailor the interface to their own preferences, that means that, outside of making ReSolver visually appealing in its basic form, ideally there would also be customization available automatically as well, such as different color themes, fonts, and being able to rearrange the basic modules. When it comes to contributor-made modules, there is even more opportunity for these interfaces to be changed, however there is also more opportunities for poor user interface designs to be put out to users of ReSolver.

### Technical Debt and Project Decay
Technical debt is, for the most part, unavoidable and something that the majority of projects experience simply through advancing and making progress. As such, it’s important to identify and address these issues in advance to know what needs to be monitored the most and prevented. For ReSolver, the biggest potential for accruing technical debt is with the community portion of the platform, as there is a certain unpredictability with what people outside of our personal team would do. For instance, there could be users who fail to work out their code properly and somehow get it past the moderation team, leading to issues within the rest of the community and causing a backlog of other work in order to fix that code. There could also be issues with documentation not being clear leading to confusion among the community, or code that doesn’t work anymore with updated versions of ReSolver, meaning that people would have to spend time going back and adjusting their modules to fit once again. Aside from the community, general issues that could affect any project include failing to update software in our tech stack, rising costs of these softwares, or features getting paywalled that weren’t paywalled before. As such, it’s also crucial to create a technology stack that stays relatively consistent, while also matching our needs as a team. 

With ReSolver, something else to be concerned about is avoiding project decay while still remaining profitable enough to keep operating. While being open-source doesn’t necessarily mean that ReSolver has to be completely free, it would make the platform much more accessible to all and align with the inherent freedom that comes with open-source. As a way to prevent a common form of enshittification with irritating and distracting advertisements, or paywalls on features, a goal that the ReSolver team would want to work on eventually is partnering with companies and custom designing modules exclusive to them that they specifically see fit for their company. While users are able to make their own modules as they see fit, it may be more beneficial to customize ReSolver for an entire company and make a tailored version that is company wide to ensure consistent information is spread. However, this may not be as profitable as necessary, and other measures would need to be discussed in the future. This would likely include paid tiers or modules that are restricted to subscribed users of ReSolver as a way to keep the base version and majority of modules still accessible to most, while still providing some kind of profit to both the creators of these modules and the ReSolver team as well.

### Tech Stack
ReSolver would specifically need a tech stack that works well for open-source, especially when considering the community participation aspect. Picking from basic tech stacks that already exist and have a strong emphasis on open-source and scalability, the MERN technology stack is appropriate for ReSolver since it is entirely made of open-source technologies. Additionally, GitHub would be woven into the tech stack as well, acting as the community hub for those who are contributing their own modules to the community page. 

### Conclusion
The open-source work platform, ReSolver, aims to bring attention to the person working in front of the screen, and their wants and needs, particularly those revolving their preferences when it comes to getting work done. Through cultivation of a strong community and easy access to customized content for the platform, ReSolver works towards creating a personalized experience for all, helping people create their ideal work environment.

### References
Splashtop. (2024, October 22). Top 10 remote work software tools for distributed teams in 2024. https://www.splashtop.com/blog/top-software-tools-remote-working-from-home 
