# AudioAccess: Open-Source Audio Library
### **Abstract** 
The project I came up with to simulate project management is an open-source audio library (AudioAccess) that holds sound files such as mp3 or wav files. This open source library would be freely accessible for everyone who wants to add or use these files that can help with music production and sound design and other various projects. This library model is seen across different apps and services producers can use, but most of these are under a subscription model or use pirating methods that can potentially be dangerous to download and use. Having a library for audio can lead to further collaboration with these producers where they can go back and forth with sending audio and using others for their own use. Being able to use these audio files also means that there would be no issues with licensing from these users. Utilizing the copyleft license model, the free use of these files would remain under the domain’s license and would only require users to make an account when wanting to add files. Hearing feedback from any source of producer, sound designer, or even listener would help with guiding the design and functionality of the project. The project would hold a team of surveyors and researchers to gain insight on what a great audio library can look like and function like.
## **Introduction**
### **The Issue**
Audio services like Splice, Loopcloud, and Cymatics have mostly needed payments to use their service and usually under a subscription model to ensure users constantly use their library of audio. Splice is arguably the biggest name in this type of audio library and they use a subscription model that adds different amounts of credits for each user to collect sounds, presets, and packs. These credits however, only are usable when the subscription is in place under the user’s account. The only way to collect more is to pay more, but the library you collect can still be used, just not expanded. AudioAccess would combat this problem with a fully accessible and free use of services even when collecting these sounds for personal use. The ability to add sounds would be under the restriction of needing to sign up for an account because of the credibility and recognition for the user. The account would be completely free to sign up for and would help with people finding more of that user’s files and/or packs. 
### **Target audience**
The audience for this library would be geared towards users who create projects with audio being integrated, but it can be usable by anyone who wants to find a certain sound to use for whatever reason they need. The library wouldn’t be exclusively used for music and would market towards all kinds of effects, noises, and loops of certain sounds people would upload to the library. There would be filters to be able to choose what kind of sound the user is looking for i.e. genre, sfx, loops, instruments, and a search tool used to find a specific sound the user might look for. Having anyone find useful sounds is a path that AudioAccess would look for as the open-source model invites collaboration and transparency to produce further favorability for using the service as opposed to a subscription service model. Having more users means more growth to AudioAccess, but can also demand expansions for storage and incentive to collaborate with different users. AudioAccess would also find audiences for different audio producers and sound designers with collaborations in order to garner attention to the service. AudioAccess would look to incentivize notable producers and designers to add their own sound packs to the site to have their fans become curious of the library. 
## **Project Overview**
### **Project Background**
This project was an idea that stemmed from my own observations on these types of audio library services because I could really only find paid services that allow people to add, collect, and use audio files. The free services were usually a set amount of files like Adobe and YouTube’s libraries or would have bad interface usability or poorly integrated audio file quality due to storage cost on the website or app. I wanted to plan this library to be everything I needed and wanted out of an audio library that wasn’t available yet. Using the open source model for the website can help with reviewing individual user experience and what kind of features that can be updated in the future lifespan of the website. Users could fully customize their packs/folders to appeal to a certain genre, sound type, etc. They would also be able to bring up different issues in a GitHub for the website in order to get direct communication with the developmental team. 
### **Why AudioAccess?**
I came up with this idea of an open and free audio library that can build its own community because of the current state of these types of online libraries. In my eyes, competition fuels creativity and passion, and what this library provides is something that can be a better alternative for producers and sound designers all around the world. Finding sounds to use in projects can be daunting as quality and price becomes a factor for people as most premium libraries are behind paywalls. This project can mean a lot for users to find their go-to spot for finding audio files and to build their own communities for uploading and collaborating with other users. Alternative libraries may not always have user created sound files, some companies use AI generated sounds which is a big issue in the creative art space. These generated files are very harmful for producers and sound designers as it takes from already existing published sounds and songs. AudioAccess will be completely AI-free as users that upload and exchange files could mistakenly use these files that don’t have any real human interaction which is vital for the community aspect of AudioAccess. Planning the project gave me insight on how the linear non-linear steps of the library could look like, and so coming up with a roadmap lends to be extremely beneficial.
### **Roadmap**
Starting at the first step, the stage that every project has to go through was to plan on how to start a team to manage and where to assign different teams for tasks to create the website. Planning this stage would be crucial to organize and to get an idea of the scope the website can be for the launch date. Having the teams would also help with contributing ideas for better designs and functions for the website. The second stage of the roadmap is to figure out how AudioAccess can either commission or collaborate with well known producers and sound designers in the industry that will allow for better attraction to using this library. Competitors in the audio library space have seen these producers make packs and collaborate with the services to get a more “professional” sound that fans of the producers can look forward to using. Finding communication with these producers and sound designers can be done through one of the teams assigned in the first step that handles all forms of communication for the team. The third stage would be advertising the site in order to see how effective our model of work is for the audio library. Gaining insight from the music producer and sound design scene would help realize what we can focus on and prioritize for the launch. Doing so would make the team utilize AudioAccess being open source with how different users would tweak the code for their individual experiences. The last stage would just be the launch of the website and to figure out where to go next. Using user experiences in the website there would be updates and expansions depending on how big the library becomes and that would be through our GitHub issue board and any forum discourse.
### **Issue Board**
Utilizing GitHub for AudioAccess’s issue boards and updates can give the transparency users need from an open source website while allowing the team to organize the issues that are needed to be fixed. Issue boards can lead the team to outline their tasks in an organized fashion that allows for greater efficiency and clearer communication. Dictating which group is to be assigned a task and who is going to work on said task lets the other members of the team know what to work on such as updates to the website, UI/UX designs, collaborations, and user account problem solving. Using GitHub for posting updates to the website to give users a heads up of what is going on with the website can help with that transparent communication between the team and users. The team can also gain an idea of what to work on for updates to the website through a forum page on the website where users can speak their mind on certain features. This can adapt the developers to prioritize a certain problem and fix it with ease as well as get specific user problems to troubleshoot what can be fixed. 
### **Technical Debt**
This audio library has multiple facets that can accumulate its technical debt as the development progresses for preparing for the website launch and post-launch life. The first debt will be seen in the development of the website itself as there needs to be a domain for the website, developers and designers who work on the project, as well as the collaborations that are planned for the launch. Development is going to be the most of the debt as programmers and UI/UX designers would need to be employed to help with the function of the website as well as the interface and usability design. These teams would also need to update the website after the launch in order to keep up with the growing website with the user accounts and storage needing to be expanded. Enshittification is also going to be something that won’t happen for AudioAccess and so finding other ways of income without sacrificing performance and needing a subscription for the website would need to be present.
### **Building a Community**
Community focus is the biggest priority this project needs as the act of online creative arts as a whole is about community and driven by the exchanges of sounds and sample packs. Like said previously in the other topics, the community aspect will be featuring a lot of collaborations from producers and sound designers, but also with the forum page, GitHub, and just exchanging sound files with each other as intended. Building the community is such a priority as it is the fuel for this website’s engine and garnering as much attention and traction will help with the library’s reputation. The website has innate community aspects to it that will really bring the library to another level compared to other alternative libraries on the internet. The community aspect isn’t there for producer to producer as most of it is just people being able to grab whatever sound they need and just put it in their catalogue. Using AudioAccess allows for people to converse with one another with the forum tab being that tool to help each other and to guide others who are new and are looking for a certain sound. People who use sound files and packs already go to different forums on the internet like reddit to find what they need or ask for a tutorial on what to do for certain sound designs. Forums could also help with specific user experiences and problems as stated in the previous paragraph. Overall, the audio library has many improvements on the existing audio library format, with the open source resourcefulness to the completely free experience that doesn’t require a subscription.
## **Conclusion**
AudioAccess fosters an experience for music makers, sound designers, and anyone wanting different sound bites for their project with ease and free access. Boasting the open source utilization also helps with clear communication for everyone involved and able to contribute which can be anyone who is a user on the website. Audio libraries are vital for creating music and sound as not everything can be made from scratch with different resources needed that some users may not have access to. AudioAccess also grants users 100 percent human user-generated audio and no AI-generated sounds which is growing more and more in the production scene. Using GitHub allows for the team to easily organize their tasks and to hear from new and experienced users of the website which is extremely beneficial compared to most other audio libraries that don’t boast any open-source formula. Creating this environment to allow users to fully contribute to the website with GitHub can create a more thoughtful experience for the users who do use these functions. The sustainability for AudioAccess would be able to grow further from these contributions and allows for the development and design team to gain a good reputation on how efficient and successful their changes are. AudioAccess can be the future of how audio libraries function and will grant anyone the ability to easily use and show off their sound files to the community of producers and sound designers.
