# Open Source Inventory System for Electronics lab
Piotr Pajerski - SP 26 - [personal site](https://www.pajerski.tech)

## Introduction
The University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign is a place that provides unique opportunities for students to engage in interdisciplinary, hands-on education through a variety of means. There are many RSOs whose aim it is to expand on the curriculum through work on some sort of long-term project, often involving the manufacture, testing, and presentation of a product or other creation. Because of the hands-on nature of these projects, students learn practical skills in design, manufacture, communication, and planning. This educational environment fosters a culture where theory meets practice, allowing for tangible outcomes that demonstrate academic proficiency beyond traditional classroom assessments and tests.

Each RSO tries to maintain a space where its members can work on the project and have access to all the resources needed to effectively continue work upon it. For many clubs, the preferred space is the OpenLab. The OpenLab is a free space in the ECEB, room 2044, which provides various tools, equipment, storage, and guidance on projects. With a wide range of supporting services like 3D printing, laser cutting, circuit board milling, 4-axis CNC, and spotwelding, the lab is home to many club and individual projects, as well as a large group of curious and hardworking students. On top of the free tooling provided by the lab, there is also a large collection of free electronic components available for student use. These are components such as capacitors, resistors, and chips which can come in handy for a variety of projects. All of these components are free for student use because they were generously donated by alumni who wanted to support the lab on its mission to provide a low barrier to entry for STEM projects. Due to the incredible impact that such resource availability has on student growth and development, maintaining accessibility and availability of such free tooling and resources is a priority for the lab. In this paper, I’ll describe an ongoing project to ensure that these resources are available and more readily and thoroughly understood for student use.

## Project Goal
While the OpenLab provides its guests with access to many free tools and components, the sheer volume of possible choices can be overwhelming. This, combined with the lack of inventory or specific knowledge of offerings, results in the resources offered by the lab being underutilized by those who may benefit from them. 
The goal of this project, broadly, is to create a lightweight and maintainable solution for inventory management within the OpenLab. While there are existing inventory software implementations, there is a necessity of building a system in-house to match the unique needs and limitations of the OpenLab. Specifically, the inventory system must be able to accurately capture a range of details about a component or tool, it must be portable and without the need for installation due to site hosting restrictions, and it must be easy to understand and maintain by future lab  staff.


## Working Open, Community Involvement
An excellent way to ensure there’s a wide dissemination of knowledge and skill related to the inventory system is to involve the OpenLab staffing community in the project. I started the project and have since been aided by 2 other lab monitors in development of the app, and several more in the effort of creating and populating the inventory catalog. The goal of this project is to create a system that is well understood by those who need to update, add, or remove from it, while maintaining the core functionality set out in the beginning. 
To ensure community engagement to further the goals of this project, I worked to raise awareness of the issue within the staff community and engaged in conversations with many of them to build excitement and commitment to the project. Even though I am graduating, the project will continue because of the recruitment of several lab monitors to continue its development into the coming school year.
The general strategy for continued involvement and development is placing the burden of new feature development upon the community and newcomers, since they’re most likely to contribute ideas and changes they’d benefit from as users of the lab. Since the openlab monitors and long-term maintainers are in charge fo keeping the lab operational and running smoothly, they’re better poised to deal with maintaining and eventually refactoring the code after the development by the community.


## Project Scope
Every successful project needs to have a well defined scope to reduce the effects of scope creep and ensure development stays productive to the overall goals of the projects. The broad goal is to provide a  system for searching the inventory to learn what is in stock. Within this broad goal, there are several sub-goals that need to be met in order to create a successful project that will serve the community well. The first important sub-goal is that the project should provide a means of exploration for students in the lab, which means increasing the awareness of the contents and availability of components. The second sub-goal for the inventory system is to increase availability of parts and tools within the lab, likely through the dissemination of location information, nicely integrated into the overall system. The third sub-goal I want for this project is maintainability through portability. The product should be a portable application that does not require any significant installation and can readily be toyed with and tested by anyone willing to contribute. Because of the relative looseness of the main and three sub-goals, this project is susceptible to a lot of scope creep. This is intentional, as it’s an exploratory project built for and by the users of the lab, so any extension in its development that is deemed a good time investment can only help the system gain functionality. Scope creep is not a huge worry due to the approach with community implementation of new ideas and consistent maintainer refactoring of the code. With this contribution design, working demonstrations of new ideas or changes can be added to the project, while the long-term maintainers make then work on any integration issues that may arise. Keeping the project portable also helps with this decentralization by reducing the overhead for new contributors.

## Project Structure and Layout
               
### Frontend
A lightweight HTML/CSS frontend must be developed for fast webpage loading. The webpage should use POST/GET to interact with the server and contain a limited amount of interactivity to reduce latency with large queries. The frontend is responsible for all user interaction, so it should be responsive and fast-loading, while providing all the necessary information in an easily digestible format. The use of static pages allows the website to be integrated nicely with multiple platforms, like differing operating systems and mobile devices, and also allows accessibility devices like screen readers to easily access the information presented to the website user. Currently the frontend, especially for the results cards page of the project, is built on the backend and sent as a single HTML file that already contains all the information pre-baked. An approach I’m interested in is moving this dynamic content generation to the client side, which would utilize JavaScript and some sort of JSON payload to generate the pages dynamically. This would result in a slower frontend due to the DOM update and transferring of the JSON, but it would also reduce the load on the server by not requiring pre-baking of the HTML before it is returned to the client. This is a matter of open debate among the contributors, but for our MVP it’s currently sitting as a server-side HTML baking system.
               Backend - HTTP Server
The HTTP server must serve the frontend webpages assembled (for now) with the search result information such that the client’s broswer can display the result as an interpretable result. It’s also responsible for passing the user query to the cleaning/parsing function, as well as receiving the result from the database connector. This is possibly the largest section of the project due to the large scope for the program to cover, from serving the pages to passing information around. While it will get simplified in the future, especially with the addition of the JSON dynamic results page, the HTTP server is still the most timing and resource sensitive part of the whole project. Building the server on Flask allows for fast prototyping and readability, but also means the overall experience of webpage service is quite slow. This is a tradeoff that has been justified many times, but it’s a very hard decision to have to make for the greater good of the project and its usefulness to the community.
As I’ll get into shortly, the database choice for this project imposes some strict requirements for the HTTP server which flask is not particularly well suited for, namely media sharing. While it is possible to base64 encode the images for the website, for development it’s easier to store them as actual PNG/WEBP images. This requires temporary offloading of media to a secondary media server (my own website) before the system can be made to work with some base64 encoded intermediary file type for the images.

### Backend - Query Parser and Database Connector
This section is responsible for receiving a query from the user, cleaning it, and passing it to an SQL database in a manner that returns the expected results. This section is the most technically challenging since the user input can be messy and difficult to interpret in the context of a database schema.
To combat the inherent complexity brought about by natural language processing to make this parsing section work, the project will utilize an LLM that will try to maintain the user conversation in the chat window, then translate it into a JSON file describing the search parameters, or a one-shot JSON encoding from a rough search query from the main page of the application. This JSON package contains key/value pairs for each of the possible search parameters, including but not limited to: component title, resistor resistance, manufacturer, etc.
Using an LLM means not having to write complex NLP or vectorization code ourselves and simplifies development, but it also results in incurred ongoing hosting costs for a large model, or the use of a fine-tuned and well prompted small model.
For the purposes of this project, a QWEN derivative model with about 4b parameters quantized to 2gb. Generating at a rate of about 30 tokens/sec, it’s fully capable of breaking down the user input according to a provided template, and filling it out to match the expected input for the database connector within about a minute for complex queries. 

### Backend - Database 
The database for this project is responsible for storing information about the components in a manner that is descriptive and useful for searches. It should also scale well to the hundreds or thousands of entries required to catalog all the parts available.
For this project, SQLITE3 was chosen due to its incredibly easy integration with python, simple SQL query syntax, and remarkable support and community. By storing the entire database as a file, SQLITE maintains the portability requirement of the project, while keeping the python code readable and very beginner friendly. SQLITE is rather slow by SQL database standards, relying on slow file reads and limited resources, and completely lacking more advanced SQL server features like entry caching for repeat lockups. SQLITE also faces the challenge of being text-only and handling images poorly. Due to this limitation, the images for components are stored as a VARCHAR string type within the database that is the URL at which the image can be loaded from the website. This database limitation results in a smaller components.db (dqlite database file) at the expense of requiring a well-maintained and organized images directory for the URL lookup to succeed. This approach also requires the HTTP server be able to handle images, which currently means a redirect to my existing server capable of media serving through nginx. 

### Tech Stack
For this project to be maintainable, the tech stack we settled on is a flask-server backend written in python for readability, HTML/CSS for the front end, and SQLITE3 for the database. While this inherently results in a slower system, the technical debt incurred as a result of this tool choice is balanced with the requirement of maintainability and readability by people who may have little experience with programming or systems in general. I anticipate there being a very fast rate of technical debt accrual if the tools were different, since writing proper server-side code is difficult and requires consideration for execution time, task scheduling, and minimizing latency in program connections. None of this is easy for the lab monitors to consider on top of their existing tasks, and it’s better for the functionality of this project to allow for quick changes at the expense of execution speed and efficiency. 

## Milestones and Timelines
This project, being a software development project, has several clear milestones for development and continued maintenance, as well as the possibility for a clear timeline. Because most of the year was spent on outreach and planning of the project, the project timeline begins with the planning and outreach phase, taking several months. The “breaking ground” on development happened in April, with a  goal for a minimum viable product demo sometime in May. After that, the alpha version should be ready and deployed by June, with the beta version ready for user feedback at the start of the next school year. Beyond that, the trajectory of the project depends on feedback from the community and ultimately the needs of the OpenLab community at large.

## Feedback Integration, Development Style
Because this is a project primarily focused on solving a specific problem within the OpenLab community, it’s vital to integrate the feedback of lab users into its long-term development. Because of the value that feedback brings to grounding the project in user needs, as well as the necessity of documentation for the continual development and understanding within the high-turnaround environment fo the lab, we’ve decided to use a Scrum system for developing this project. The development life cycle is a loop that comprises of gathering current issues and feedback from users, developing an improved version of the app, testing it, and finally documenting the changes made if the new version is preferred. Each piece of feedback or issue will become its own sprint goal and guide specific development, while the overall product goal is determined by the lab monitors who comprise the maintaining body for this application 
To avoid burnout within the maintaining community, the sprints will be organized loosely and not tied to a strict timeline. While this does increase the risk of stalled development, it allows the community to prioritize a quality product that suits their needs over creating frequent deliverables that can feel like a chose and cause dropout.

## Automation
Because of the small scale of this project, there will be very little automation when it comes to the development of the program or management of the project. There will be deployment automation to take the git release and automatically push it to the OpenLab webpage, but this is done for convenience and to avoid mishandled deployments. Keeping automation to a minimum reduces the overhead to maintain these tools, and means a smaller learning curve for people new to the project.

## Conclusion
In conclusion, this in-progress system for maintaining the inventory of the openlab is an exciting, community-centered project that has the potential for great positive impact within the community and lab workspace. Currently working on MVP/Alpha, the conceptual groundwork has been laid out and exciting progress is being made integrating all the parts into a usable product by following good project management and community design practices. Utilizing scheduling, clear organization and roles, and a decently defined scrum workflow, this project will likely become operational by next fall and, excitingly, may see real use in the coming years. 

Open Source Initiative. “Open Source Licenses.” https://opensource.org/
Wobbrock, J. O., Kane, S. K., Gajos, K. Z., Harada, S., & Froehlich, J. (2011). Ability-Based Design: Concept, Principles and Examples. ACM Transactions on Accessible Computing, 3(3), 1–27.
